Chapter Thirty-One of the Exalted Mahāratnakūṭa Dharmaparyāya in One Hundred Thousand Chapters:
“Explanation of the Questions of Gaṅgottarā”. Half a fascicle.1

In the language of India: Ārya Gaṅgottaraparipṛcchā nāma mahāyānasūtra

Homage to all Buddhas and Bodhisatvas!2

This is what I have heard: Once, the Blessed One was staying in Jeta's Grove, in the pleasure
garden donated by Anāthapiṇḍada.

At that time, a laywoman by the name of Gaṅgottarā was living in the great city of Śrāvastī.

One day, the laywoman Gaṅgottarā left Śrāvastī and went to Jeta's Grove, to Anāthapiṇḍada's
pleasure garden. Upon arriving, she saluted the Blessed One by placing her head at his feet,
and sat down to one side.

When she had sat down to one side, the Blessed One, although he already knew the answer, asked
the laywoman Gaṅgottarā: Where have you come from, Gaṅgottarā?

Gaṅgottarā answered: Blessed One, if someone asked a magically conjured being, “Where have you
come from?”, what would the answer be?

The Blessed One replied: A magical being does not stand, does not sit, does not lie down, does
not come, does not go, does not die and is not born. How then can anyone say that they
have come from somewhere?

Gaṅgottarā continued: Blessed One, aren't all phenomena like magical beings?

Exactly, Gaṅgottarā, he replied.

If all phenomena are like magical beings, Blessed One, then why ask “Where have you come from,
Gaṅgottarā?”, she responded.

The Blessed One said: Gaṅgottarā, a magical being does not go to the realms of misery, nor to
the heavenly realms, nor to parinirvāṇa. Do you too then, Gaṅgottarā, not go to the lower
realms, nor to the heavenly realms, nor to parinirvāṇa?Gaṅgottarā answered: Blessed One,
if I were to see myself as being anything other than a magical creation, and then were to
say that I, the laywoman Gaṅgottarā, do not go to the lower realms, nor to the heavenly realms,
nor to parinirvāṇa, then it would not be correct to say that I was like a magically
created being.

Blessed One, I don't see Gaṅgottarā as being anything other than a magical creation. That being
the case, Blessed One, how can I maintain that the laywoman Gaṅgottarā goes to lower realms,
to heavenly realms, to parinirvāṇa?

If that is the case, Blessed One, and if fluctuation, conceit, agitation, and mental proliferation
exist, then how can anyone think that they go to lower realms, to heavenly realms,
to parinirvāṇa?

Blessed One, nirvāṇa-nature never goes to the lower realms or to the heavenly realms, and never
realizes parinirvāṇa. I, Blessed One, the laywoman Gaṅgottarā, also possess such a nature.

The Blessed One said: Gaṅgottarā, haven't you yourself set out for parinirvāṇa?

She answered: Blessed One, if someone asks the unborn “Haven't you set out for parinirvāṇa”,
what would the answer be?

The Blessed One replied: Gaṅgottarā, since the unborn is a synonym for nirvāṇa, then what can
the answer be?

Gaṅgottarā answered: Blessed One, are all phenomena the same as nirvāṇa?He said: Exactly, Gaṅgottarā.
All phenomena are the same as nirvāṇa.

She said: Blessed One, if all phenomena are the same as nirvāṇa, why ask “Haven't you yourself
set out for nirvāṇa?”

Blessed One, if someone asked a magical being, “Haven't you yourself set out for nirvāṇa?”,
what could the answer be?

The Blessed One said: Gaṅgottarā, this question has no foundation.

She said: Blessed One, are you making a statement which has a foundation?

He said: Gaṅgottarā, this question has indeed no foundation. Nonetheless, I ask this question
because it will be of great benefit to the noble sons and noble daughters who are gathered
here in this assembly.

Why? If the Tathāgata had not realized the way things are, Gaṅgottarā, then phenomena would
still arise in his nirvāṇa.

She said: If the Blessed One had not realized the way things are, and phenomena were still arising,
then how could the Blessed One have accomplished the roots of virtue in order to attain
awakening.

The Blessed One responded: Gaṅgottarā, that which has perception can not be a root of virtue.
When a bodhisatva accomplishes roots of virtue, he does not abandon inconceivability.When
he does not accomplish roots of virtue, he still does not abandon inconceivability.

She asked: Blessed One, the inconceivable is called "inconceivable". Why is it inconceivable?

The Blessed One said: This Dharma is not attained by the mind, the mind cannot attain it.

Why? How can phenomena arise in the mind when the mind itself can not be perceived? Gaṅgottarā,
the fact that the mind has no perception is called "the inconceivable continuum".

The continuum which is inconceivable can not be attained, can not be understood, can not be
known, can not be realized. It is not something that can be attained, it does not have kleśas,
it is not fully purified.

How is that? Gaṅgottara, in this way the tathāgata certainly understands that all dharmas are
like space. Gaṅgottara, all dharmas, like space, does not obstruct.

She said: Blessed One, if all dharmas is equal to space, being without obstruction, then why
does the Blessed One designate form (rūpa), feeling (vedanā), perception (saṃjñā), formation
(samskāra), consciousness (vijñāna), the aggregates, the elements, the sense-bases, dependent
arising, with pollution, without pollution, defilement, purification (vyavadāna),
saṃsāra, nirvāṇa? How can this be?

The Blessed One said: Gaṅgottarā, as an example: I designate “self, self”, however, I do not
perceive anything as real. Similarly, Gaṅgottara, I designate form, but there is not any
kind of form perceived.

Likewise, I designate feeling, perception, formation, and consciousness, but do not perceive
any consciousness as real.

Skandhas, elements, sense-sources, dependent origination, pollution, non-pollution, defilements,
purification, saṃsāra, nirvāṇa is designated, but I do not perceive it as anything real.

Gaṅgottara, as an example, in the mirage I do not perceive the existence or non-existence of
water.

Gaṅgottara, likewise, even though I designate form there is no real form perceived.

Even though I designate feeling, perception, formation, consciousness, I do not perceive consciousness
as anything real.

Even though I designate skandhas, elements, sense-sources, dependent origination, pollution,
non-pollution, defilements, purification, saṃsāra, nirvāṇa, ultimately all these things are
not there and are not perceived.

Gaṅgottarā, whoever is not attached to the dharma and practices the holy life, such a one is
one who dwells in the holy life, in the well-explained dharmavinaya.

Gaṅgottarā, the ones who dwell in excessive pride in their practice of the holy life, those
do not keep the holy life completely pure. So I declare.

Those who do not keep the holy life completely pure become scared when they hear this profound
dharma which cuts through.

They are not liberated from birth, aging, sickness, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, unease,
disturbance. They will have their share of suffering. So I declare.

Gaṅgottara, now or after I pass away, those confused people who towards those who teach such
a profound dharma that cuts off the stream produce the idea of murdering them, those stupid
people have taken the wrong way and have produced the rage of murder and will go to the
miserable states.

Gaṅgottara said: Blessed One, you say “stream-chopping, stream-chopping”, why do you call it
stream-chopping?

The Blessed One said: Gaṅgottara, this is not cutting off, this is not differentiation, this
is not destruction. That is why it's called destruction. That is why it is the absolute extreme
of existence. This is the inconceivable continuum.

Then the Blessed One smiled.

Then from the mouth of the Blessed One variegated light, with colours like green, yellow, white,
red, crystal, and silver issued forth, and these lights without end, without limit, after
having illuminated universes without end and without limit, and having filled them, they
rose up to the Brahma heavens. Then they came back again to their master and disappeared
into the mouth of the Blessed One.

Then the Venerable Ānanda placed his robe over one shoulder, knelt down on his right knee, and
with hands folded towards the Blessed One, he asked the Blessed One this question.

“As Blessed Ones and Tathāgatas do not smile for no reason, what is the reason for smiling?”

The Blessed One said, “Ānanda, it has been directly known by me that here in this place 1000
Tathāgatas taught this turning of the Dharma to laywomen, all of them with the very same
name of Gaṅgottara.

All of those laywomen, have gone forth and have then been released in that element of release
that is without remainder.”

Then the Venerable Ānanda said this to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, what is the name of this
Dharma teaching, and how should we remember it?”

The Blessed One answered, “This Dharma talk is called “Without Impurity”, and this is how it
should be remembered.”

When this Dharma teaching was given to 700 monks and 400 nuns without any attachment, their
minds were completely liberated from the pollutions.

Then the gods of the realm of sensual desire and the god-sons who inhabit the realm of form
magically created divine flowers and sandalwood powder, scattered them over the Buddha, and
then said,

“In the city of Śrāvastī lives a laywoman who was able to have a conversation with the Tathāgata
without becoming tired. This is because she has served Victorious Ones of the past, produced
the roots of skilfulness, practised the good for a long time, practised the holy life
for a long time, paid homage to many Buddhas. This is wonderful. This is what we declare.”

The Blessed One said, “That is so, god-sons. This person has served former Victorious Ones,
cultivated roots of skilfulness, and lived the holy life for a long time.”

When the Blessed One had pronounced this teaching, the laywoman Gaṅgottarā, and the world with
its gods, asuras, and gandharvas were delighted, and praised his words highly.

